Dorota clickhouse add query cache (#591)
aiven/aiven-docs: docs/products/clickhouse/howto/clickhouse-query-cache.md

---
title: Use query cache in Aiven for ClickHouse®
sidebar_label: Use query cache
---

Aiven for ClickHouse® provides a query cache mechanism that helps improve query performance
by caching query results.

## How it works

When the Aiven for
[ClickHouse query cache](https://clickhouse.com/docs/en/operations/query-cache) is enabled,
multiple identical `SELECT` queries run simultaneously are computed only once,
and further executions of the same query are served directly from the cache.

:::important
By default, the Aiven for ClickHouse query cache is disabled for all `SELECT` queries.
:::

## Why use it

Using query cache in your Aiven for ClickHouse services can help reduce latency and
resource consumption.

Key use case for the Aiven for ClickHouse query cache are the following:

- Performance enhancement: Reducing latency and load for frequently executed queries
- Analytical workloads: Using complex repetitive queries that involve high data aggregation

## Enable query cache

> To enable the query cache for a query, use an SQL client (for example, the

Reviewer: It still sounds like using client and applying settings in this way is necessary.
I would white something like
"To enable the query cache, setting `use_query_cache` should be set to `1`. It can be done by adding `SETTINGS use_query_cache = 1` to the end of your query.

[ClickHouse client](/docs/products/clickhouse/howto/connect-with-clickhouse-cli)) and
append `SETTINGS use_query_cache = 1` to your query:

```sql
SELECT 1
SETTINGS use_query_cache = 1;
```

## Configure query cache

To configure the query cache settings, use an SQL client (for example, the
[ClickHouse client](/docs/products/clickhouse/howto/connect-with-clickhouse-cli)) and
append a defined setting to your query, for example:

```sql
SELECT 1
SETTINGS use_query_cache = 1, query_cache_min_query_runs = 5000;
```

You can configure the following query cache settings:

- `enable_writes_to_query_cache`
- `enable_reads_from_query_cache`
- `query_cache_max_entries`
- `query_cache_min_query_runs`
- `query_cache_min_query_duration`
- `query_cache_compress_entries`
- `query_cache_squash_partial_results`
- `query_cache_ttl`
- `query_cache_share_between_users`

## Limitation

- Maximum query cache size: 64 MiB for each GiB of RAM (for example, 256 MiB for a 4-GiB
  service or 1 GiB for a 16-GiB service)
- Maximum number of query cache entries: 64 entries for each GiB of RAM (for example,

>   1024 entries for a 16-GiB service)

Reviewer: The main limitation is that the query is not updated when the underlying data changes

---
title: Use query cache in Aiven for ClickHouse®
sidebar_label: Use query cache
---

Aiven for ClickHouse® provides a query cache mechanism that helps improve query performance
by caching query results.

## How it works

When the Aiven for
[ClickHouse query cache](https://clickhouse.com/docs/en/operations/query-cache) is enabled,

> multiple identical `SELECT` queries run simultaneously are computed only once,

Reviewer 2: Could we consider revising this for clarity? For example:
```suggestion
multiple identical `SELECT` queries run simultaneously and are computed only once,
```
```suggestion
multiple identical `SELECT` queries running simultaneously are computed only once
```

> and further executions of the same query are served directly from the cache.

Reviewer 2: How about this, break the sentence: 
```suggestion
. Subsequent executions of the same query are served directly from the cache.
```

..identical SELECT queries running simultaneously are computed only once. Subsequent executions of the same query are served directly from the cache.

---
title: Use query cache in Aiven for ClickHouse®
sidebar_label: Use query cache
---

Aiven for ClickHouse® provides a query cache mechanism that helps improve query performance
by caching query results.

## How it works

When the Aiven for
[ClickHouse query cache](https://clickhouse.com/docs/en/operations/query-cache) is enabled,
multiple identical `SELECT` queries run simultaneously are computed only once,
and further executions of the same query are served directly from the cache. If the result
of a SELECT query changes, the database invalidates and discards cached query results.
Operations that change the data are `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, or `DELETE`.

:::important
By default, the Aiven for ClickHouse query cache is disabled for all `SELECT` queries.
:::

## Why use it

Using query cache in your Aiven for ClickHouse services can help reduce latency and
resource consumption.

Key use case for the Aiven for ClickHouse query cache are the following:

- Performance enhancement: Reducing latency and load for frequently executed queries
- Analytical workloads: Using complex repetitive queries that involve high data aggregation

> - Data pipelines: [Using materialized views](/docs/products/clickhouse/concepts/federated-queries)

Reviewer: I do not understand how materialized views are related to the Query Cache. Looks like it is actually another way to handle the problem

  to optimize recurring data transformation and aggregation

## Enable query cache

To enable the query cache for a query, use an SQL client (for example, the
[ClickHouse client](/docs/products/clickhouse/howto/connect-with-clickhouse-cli)) and

> append `SETTINGS use_query_cache = 1` to your query, for example:

Reviewer: Looks like it is the only way to use the query cache. In fact you need to change the setting and it is the just easiest way to do so.

```sql
SELECT 1
SETTINGS use_query_cache = 1;
```

## Configure query cache

To configure the query cache settings, use an SQL client (for example, the
[ClickHouse client](/docs/products/clickhouse/howto/connect-with-clickhouse-cli)) and
append a defined setting to your query, for example:

```sql
SELECT 1
SETTINGS use_query_cache = 1, query_cache_min_query_runs = 5000;
```

You can configure the following query cache settings:

- `enable_writes_to_query_cache`
- `enable_reads_from_query_cache`
- `query_cache_max_entries`
- `query_cache_min_query_runs`
- `query_cache_min_query_duration`
- `query_cache_compress_entries`
- `query_cache_squash_partial_results`
- `query_cache_ttl`
- `query_cache_share_between_users`

## Limitation

- Maximum query cache size: 64 MiB for each GiB of RAM (for example, 256 MiB for a 4-GiB
  service or 1 GiB for a 16-GiB service)
- Maximum number of query cache entries: 64 entries for each GiB of RAM (for example,
  1024 entries for a 16-GiB service)

> - Query cache is not long-lived: cached results are invalidated when the underlying data

Reviewer: No, if data changes, the cached result is not invalidated and may return incorrect result https://clickhouse.com/blog/introduction-to-the-clickhouse-query-cache-and-design
